Genesis chapter 1
An important thing to note is that Genesis chapter one and many chapters were not written to be extremely specific and scientific, back then what people cared about more were metaphors, overall main messages and not extremely specific details which is why many people don’t believe the Bible as it does not fully mention the things they were hoping to see such as at what time specifically did creation happen, but this is not the goal of the Bible. The storytelling has a parabolic style, but the characters are historical. God’s inspired word uses Mesopotamian style of history writing. Moses was the author of this book which was inspired by God to tell the story of how the beginning started. In the beginning means the absolute beginning. This phrase is used in John 1, 1 which says that in the beginning the Word was already there. It talks about the beginning of everything, before history, the time when all that existed was God. God is self-sufficient and does not need anything outside of himself. He depends on nothing, but everything depends on him. He created us because he loves us. God is love but that doesn’t mean that all love is good and from God because sometimes our love is corrupt and evil. God creates the fruit which foreshadows Adam and Eve’s fall by eating fruit and breaking God’s command. Fruit even foreshadows spiritual fruit that we produce after receiving the Holy Spirit and believing in Jesus. God made the fish and the birds. The reason fish and birds are mentioned is because they both must be born twice: firstly, when they lay eggs and secondly when they hatch. This is meaningful because we also are born again twice: firstly, when we are normally born and secondly when we are baptized with the holy spirit. Also, birds go against the flow by flying in the air and fish swim against the flow and when we are born again and follow Jesus, we go against the flow of the world. We are made in the image of God which means we are very valuable.
Genesis chapter 4
Cain and Abel both gave offerings to the Lord but only Abel was noticed. This made Cain mad, however God said that if you are doing good, then you will be noticed. And if you don’t do good, then sin is lurking, but you must master it, you don’t have to sin. If trash is in the trash can, then that is good, it becomes bad when trash leaves the trash can and that is when we sin. The reason why God might have only acknowledged Abel was because his offering was full, he put everything he had into it and Cains offering was whatever was left and meaningless to us. When it comes to prayer and spending time with God, do we give it our all? Do we spend time with our Lord first thing in the morning and sacrifice your time because we love God or do, we feel that it is a chore? In Mark 12, 38-44 when the widow gives 2 coins, she gives everything she had, and Jesus says that she gave more than anyone else and was noticed. That is because she trusted in the Lord and had faith that he will provide and that his sacrifice is worth giving everything away. To give everything means to have a lot of faith in the Lord. Let’s try to give everything we have for our Lord in terms of time, prayer and we will be noticed like Abel, love always requires sacrifice, make your time with God even more meaningful.
Genesis chapter 5
Henoch went with God for 300 years and the was taken by God. He was taken, so that he wouldn’t experience death (Hebrews 11, 5). This was because he walked by faith and trusted in God. Seth is Adam’s son and is born in Adam’s image and God made man male and female after his own image. And that makes men sons of God. This is recalled only in this chapter and not in Cain’s line in order to draw a sharp contrasts or distinction between the two lines. This line produces righteous men like Noah and Enoch while the other line produces murderers like Le’mach. 
Genesis chapter 6
Faith is everything, walk by faith
God made the human lifespan 120 years instead of 800-900, this is the max age that humans live to today. Some of the people became giants. And God SAW that people had become wicked (Genesis 6, 5). God saw us with his own eyes and in his eyes, we were wicked which means that his thoughts are true and ours aren’t. We mostly rely on our own thoughts, but our thoughts are evil, we often see things and think that they are good but in Gods eyes they are not. Only God is the one who is corrects so we must know his word to make correct decisions that God approves. You will find out what the correct choices are by reading the Bible because this book is God word which is good. Since people fell into sin and evil, God regretted creating humans (Genesis 6, 6). Because of this he decided to wipe out all of humanity and animals. He told Noah to build an Ark and gather pairs of all creatures on earth so that they could survive after the Flood. Noah listens to God, because his God is always right. We should always listen to God instead of our hearts, event when it might seem unfair. It is impossible to be liked by God without faith and by having faith you will be rewarded (Hebrews 11, 6). Noah was informed by God and listened to him, had faith in him and rejected the world and became the heir of the righteousness which is according to faith. I can walk with the Lord today; the Lord offers hope to every one of us no matter what our situation is.
Genesis chapter 7
Noah was the only one that was righteous in God’s eyes and that is way more important than being right in the eyes of humans. It doesn’t matter how you lived before, but what matters is how you live now and today we need to be righteous with God. There is no righteousness in the side of God without obedience to the will and word of God. That is why reading the word and spending time with God is crucial.

Genesis chapter 8
Noah investigated if the land was safe for a few months before getting out of the ark, he had a lot of patience and only left the ark after the heard from God that it was safe to leave. We often act fast based on what we see, but sometimes we need to listen to God’s voice and walk by faith, not by sight. God makes a promise to not destroy living creatures because of their sin and faults because humans are linked with sin from birth.
Genesis chapter 9
God makes a promise that he will never do the Flood again and won’t destroy earth (Genesis 9, 11). The rainbow is a sign that reminds us of his promise. God makes it clear that murder is prohibited (Genesis 9, 6). The reason why Ham cursed is because he saw Noah naked which was believed to be an expression of laying with the father’s wife which is considered a way of trying to dominate their father, that is why Noah cursed him. And Shem and Japheth did not do that and honored their father. And now Canaan is the enemy of the people of Israel. The family broke into two parts just like in Genesis chapter 5 where the family split in Cains and Seth’s line. We often act not according to God’s ways, our thoughts are often wicked and evil, that is why we need the Lord’s grace every day. There is a big contrast between Genesis chapter 3 and this chapter as in chapter 3 Adam and Eve did not feel shame when they were naked as there was no sin and only when they sinned they felt shame. In this chapter Ham told about Noah being naked to his brothers not feeling any shame for the sin but his brother’s did the opposite and understood that sin is serious and should not be made fun of. We all should take sin seriously as it is not some kind of joke but is offensive to God so we must repent of our sins and ask for forgiveness.
Genesis chapter 10
Family is important, God can change a families history. It is important be a good influence in your family as other generations depend on the previous families. All these names In this chapter show that God’s children are all over the planet and that these people would not have existed if it wasn’t for the previous families.
Genesis chapter 11
God mixed the languages of the people of Babylon. This was because they tried to reach Heaven by building a giant tower but God quickly switched their plan. Maybe there’s a reason why God gave us many different languages because if he had not done that, then the people might have become more powerful, arrogant and often empires end up being evil. Abraham came from a family that worshiped Idols and weren’t godly, this is mentioned in the book of Joshua. Just in chapter 9 Ham was cursed by Noah and now from the same family Abraham is born and God chose him to be a prophet? This tells us that no matter what happened in the past, God can choose you and you can become his servant.
Genesis chapter 12
God promises to make Abram or later known as Abraham into a great nation that will bless the world and live in Cainan. Only through Jesus these promises are perfectly kept. Jesus is the one that will complete these promises and make the current church. Abraham shows a great example of faith as he listen’s to God and goes to an area he has never been in. However, Abraham also showed fear as he asked his wife to pretend to be his sister and so pharaoh slept with her and took her as his wife which made God upset and he punished pharaoh for that. And now pharaoh kicked Abraham and his people out of his place.
Genesis chapter 13
Abraham and Lot become sperate, Lot lived in Sodom where people sinful against God and Abraham got the area of Canan. The Lords says that this is the place that he will give to him and his descendants. God promises to make Abraham’s descendants as large as there is dust in the world which means a very giant number and today there are billions of Christians.
Genesis chapter 14
The war between 4 kings happened and when the kings took over Abraham’s land and took his nephew, he sent 318 soldiers that won against the kings. Abraham was greeted my Melchizedek who offers bread and wine which symbolizes the last supper when Jesus turned bread and wine into his body and blood. Jesus is referred to the great priest Melchizedek’s way in Hebrews chapter 7. This is because Jesus did not pass away and it’s not an inherited priesthood, but Jesus is the great priest of all time, and he is like Melchizedek who has neither a beginning nor end. After this Abraham gave Melchizedek 10% of what he had. Abraham refuses to take the king of Sodom’s money because he doesn’t want to become rich through other people. Abraham is generous and faithful to God and will not take advantage of others and their money, he is fair and trusts God.
Genesis chapter 15
God makes a promise that Abraham’s descendants will be as large as the stars in the sky and Abraham trusted in God’s promise and God accounted it to him for righteousness. By hearing the word of God Abraham trusted in him more and grew in faith. The same thing goes for us. We can only grow in faith if we hear the word of God which means we have to read the Bible every day to grow in faith and love God even more.
Genesis chapter 16
Sarai asks Hagar to be the wife of Abraham so that they could produce a kid since Sarai couldn’t. But this idea was not suggested by God, and it ends up that the child Izmael is born to a slave and is not the promised child by God. Abrah tried to earn through effort what God promised through grace. When Jesus died on the cross, he took the punishment that we deserve, and we are the one’s who broke the covenant. No punishment remains for those who believe in Jesus. Instead, all that remains is the promise.
Genesis chapter 17
A few chapters ago God told Abraham that he will have a child. About two decades later God reminded them about the promise. This is a very long-time gap which might have caused some doubt in Abraham, but God’s promise just took time and patience. We often might not hear God’s voice which might lead us away from God. But faith requires patience and time. God’s time is always right. God says that Abraham will have another child with Sarah. Abraham laughs because he doesn’t understand how a child is born out of a ninety-year-old. God makes a covenant with all descendants of Abraham and his family for them to be circumcised. This is a good example of Abraham’s obedience. Even though he first laughed and doubted God, the very same day he did what God told him to do and circumcised everyone. This means that you don’t have to have perfect faith to obey God or be used by him. Even Abraham didn’t have perfect faith, but God still chose him.
Genesis chapter 18
God shows up in human form with two angels. God says that Sarah will have a child a year from now. Sarah does the same thing as Abraham did in the last chapter, she laughs. God responded to her unbelief by asking: “Is anything too hard for me?” Then Sarah denied that she laughed but that’s a lie, God sees the heart and everything you do. God showed up because he hears the cries of Sodom and Gomora, he always hears us. Then Abraham negotiates with God asking if he finds 50 righteous people, will he destroy the cities. Abraham negotiates all the way to only 10 people. God is always fair, and mercy and he will always make the right decision (Genesis 18, 25). Every time we are not sure about a situation, we are questioning God’s fairness, but his decision will always be fair. We must always trust him.
Genesis chapter 19
No one is good
The angels warn Lot that they will destroy the Sodom city and tell him to grab all his family and leave. However, some of them didn’t believe Lot and thought he was just joking. This may have been because Lot wasn’t fully committed to God. He was comfortable with the place where he lived and did not fully spent time with God. When God was destroying both Sodom and Gomorrah, Lot’s wife was looking back and so she was killed. This is an example of Jesus’s teaching of whoever tries to save their life, will loose it, but whoever loses it, will find it (Luke 17, 33). The way the cities were destroyed will be the same when Jesus returns (Luke 17, 30). The whole world is Sodom and Gomorrah because it is all evil and no one is righteous (Psalm 14, 3: “They have all turned aside; together they have become corrupt; there is none who does good, not even one.”). This isn’t the first time this has happened; the flood has already proved this. Currently in the place where the cities were destroyed is the Dead Sea, the land is dead. Lot and his children were saved because of Abraham’s righteousness. Jesus is the perfect righteous one, through him we are saved because of his righteousness. Jesus even says that it will be more bearable for Sodom and Gomorrah on the day of judgement that other towns that don’t believe in Jesus (Mathew 10, 15; 11, 23-24). In the end of the chapter Lot’s daughters get pregnant by their father because they were living in fear and did not trust God’s plan. They gave birth to people who were enemies of Israel. All this accomplished was negative effects, that is why we shouldn’t live by fear but by what God tells us to do.
Genesis chapter 20
Abraham once again chose fear over God because he said that his wife is his sister to avoid being killed. This time God warned Abimelech that he will be killed if he sleeps with Abraham’s wife and so nothing bad happens. We can often be walking by faith for a while and everything might be going great like it was for Abraham but sometimes we stumble and fall into sin again, however God is merciful and forgiving and he will forgive us if we repent. God also often preserves and saves us from a fall like he did to Abimelech so that he wouldn’t sin (Genesis 20, 6). But also, God lets us fall so that we would learn from our mistakes and learn to trust God more. Your failure doesn’t disqualify you. Also, it is important not to assume negative things about others when you don’t know. Abraham assumed that the was no fear of God in that place and the people were lost, didn’t have integrity, however the ones who didn’t have integrity here were Abraham and his wife, because of their assumptions. Just because someone doesn’t follow Jesus doesn’t mean they are worse than everybody else.
Genesis chapter 21
God’s promise is finally fulfilled, Isaac is born when Abraham is a hundred years old. When God first told his promise, Abraham was seventy-five years old. God always does thing his way and, in his time, his time might not always be the time we would like. Because of the long time period Sarah had become impatient, which led to decisions that caused problems such as Sarah disliking the maid Hagar. Always remember that God’s plan is always right and if you decide to do thing your way, you may create problems.
Genesis chapter 22
God tested Abraham by wanting to sacrifice his son. Abraham listened without hesitation and almost sacrificed his only son but was stopped by the angels because God wouldn’t just want a child to be killed, he was testing if Abraham’s faith was strong enough. God often tests us by putting us in difficult situations to see if we will persevere and trust in him to provide during difficult times. Abraham was willing to sacrifice everything he had for God; he didn’t hold back. We must be willing to sacrifice things ourselves so that we could get closer to God, for example and idol in our life. If we hold back things then we could be possibly robing the world from a blessing that God wants to give them through us. By sacrificing things for God, we show our faith and become more like him because Jesus sacrificed himself for us to save us from death. God says that all nations from Abraham will be blessed because he was obedient to God and this promise was fulfilled because through Abraham’s descendants Jesus was born. Abraham’s son laid down willingly which is an example of what will happen in the future as the Father sent his only begotten son who willingly died for us. This story about Abraham and Isaac is not just a story but a revelation of how the Father sacrificed his Son for us. 
Genesis chapter 23
This chapter show the death of Abraham’s wife Sarah. Abraham negotiates buying a place to bury Sarah. This was the very first piece of land that he had ever bought. That means that they haven’t bought any land for six decades since this is the amount of time they have been living in the promise land. This shows that they had an incredible amount of patience and faith because God promised that they would have land in the promise land. In the area where they are considered aliens, but they persevered and eventually God’s promise was fulfilled. Our desire to get thing quickly can change our character negatively, remember that God’s time is not our time.
Genesis chapter 24
Abraham’s servant goes on a mission to find Isaac a wife. He asks God for a sign to find who he should bring back (Genesis 24, 14). Before he finishes his prayer, the sign is fulfilled by a woman named Rebecca. Rebecca gives the servant and his animals water to grind and then brings him to the family where they take care of him. The family agrees that this was orchestrated by God and allow Rebecca to go to Isaac. Isaac and Rebecca loved each other. A similar story is recorded in John chapter 4 where Jesus goes to a well which is not in the promised land. Jews of Jesus’s day didn’t typically go to that area. There he find a woman and makes the same request asking for a drink. In this chapter we find out that geographical distances and moral distances can still approach God through Jesus. God not only bring obedient and beautiful people like Rebecca but also the rude, outcasted and disobedient people like the woman at the well closer to him.
Genesis chapter 25
Abraham dies and Esau and Jacob are born. These children were a blessing to Isaac and Rebecca that they have been praying for. However, they start to play favorites with their children – Esau is the favorite of Isaac and Jacob is the favorite of Rebecca. Sometimes our way of responding to God’s blessings may be not as God wants. For example, praying for money and after receiving the gift you stop praying and attending church. There are a lot of people that act like this where they only want to get something for themselves and later forget about God. The blessing we get might be the very thing that defeat us spiritually.
Genesis chapter 26
Isaac does the exact same thing as Abraham did twice to the exact same guy – he says that his wife is his sister because is was scared of being killed. We often fall into the same trap over and over again. We trade something that is good into something that is worse. When you are choosing something over God, you are trading what God’s inheritance he has given you for something less. But humans don’t think about it like that and only see what is in front of them. These examples show our own brokenness and need for God’s grace and forgiveness.
Genesis chapter 27
Jacob deceives his father into thinking that he blessed Esau. But after Jacob was blessed, Isaac did not take away his blessings. This is the same for us, once you are baptized and put your faith in Jesus you can’t undo that. After you start following Jesus and trust in him, you are considered righteous and no matter how many times you fall, you get back up and are still righteous. Jacob is not only the received of Esau’s birthright but also the receiver of his fathers blessing. This makes Esau really mad and because of this he wants to kill his brother. This situation has already happened once in the bible in Genesis chapter 4 when Kaan killed Able because he was jealous of him. The family played favorites, and it ended up destroying the family. The family got to the point where Rebecca and Jacob had to lie to the father. Families have to be fair to their kids and treat them equally.
Genesis chapter 28
Jacob goes on a journey to his family’s household to find a wife. He stops for the night and has a dream that changes his life. He sees a large ladder connecting earth to heaven and sees angels ascending and descending on it. This is the opposite of the tower of Babel where humans tried to build a tower to reach heaven. This time God is the one that builds the tower. He doesn’t call the humans to come up but sends angels to travel down the ladder. By the end of the dream people are not dispersed like they were when building tower of Babel but instead God promises to unite people under one new nation in Jacob. At the tower of Babel, it was man’s effort but in the ladder it is God’s. Jesus references this ladder in John chapter 1, 51: “And he said to him, “Truly, truly, I say to you, you will see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of man.” By saying this, Jesus means that he is the one that connects heaven and earth. In John chapter 10, 9 Jesus calls himself the door, saying that he opens the way to heaven and God. You get to God not by building a tower of good works but by trusting in Jesus and his sacrifice. Getting to God starts with God getting to us.
Jacob was at a low point because he had lied to his father, stolen his brothers birthright and had to escape his brother because he is trying to kill him. And it was at this low point when God showed himself to Jacob and that is when Jacob started seeing who God was. This was the turning point of his life. Don’t ever give up on people who are far from God because you never know when a turning point can come. Keep praying for others no matter how low they get. Things can always turn around and the one who saves them from the lowest point is God.
Genesis chapter 29
Laban tricked Jacob into marrying the older daughter first even though Jacob wanted to marry the younger daughter. What Jacob had done to Esau, Laban did to Jacob, in other words, trick him. Just because you are right with God doesn’t mean that the consequences of your sin go away. Our sin catches up to us. Sometimes God, even when we are righteous, allows us to deal with the pain of our sin, so that we could grow and learn from our mistakes. Jacob had to experience it himself before he could understand how Esau felt after he tricked him.
Genesis chapter 30
God blessed Jacob with 12 children. God blesses us even when we don’t deserve it. He always wants the best for us and will never leave us alone. Jacob agreed with Laban to watch his sheep longer before he left to go back to Cannan. They agreed that Jacob would keep the sheep that were born speckled, and Laban would keep the solid color sheep. Laban agreed but tried to trick him and cheat him out of sheep so that Jacob would not leave him. We sometimes try to trick each other so that we would get some benefit but remember to think about others too and realize that you may be going too far.
Genesis chapter 31
The biggest trick
Laban has lied to Jacob about 10 times, changed his pay and wasted the blessing that God has given him. After Jacob and his two wives and children leave, Laban goes out and searches for Jacob. God warns Laban to not do anything bad with Jacob. God always sees, judges and blesses. God blesses Jacob and judges Laban for his actions. In the end they make covenant and go on their way. Sometimes we can focus to much on idols and get farther away from God.  We must come back to the Lord and repent and focus on him, leaving our old lifestyle. There has never been a bigger trick and lie than the innocent murder of Jesus. The cross shows us that no matter how dark things get, God brings about his good intentions. God made the death of Jesus from being the worst thing the world has even seen into the best gift the ever gave us. Jesus performed the ultimate trick against death by rising from the dead. That means God can bring good out of anything.
Genesis chapter 32
Jacob gets scared because he finds out that Esau is coming to meet him with a 400 men army. Jacob was afraid that he might get killed. Fear is a natural human reaction even for people who are walking with God. After experiencing fear, Jacob starts praying to God so that he would protect him. This example shows us that when we are afraid and experience fear, the first thing we should do is pray and remind ourselves the things God has promised us, just like Jacob did. Remember that no matter what happens, Jesus paid the price for our sins and loves us no matter what.
Why did Jacob wrestle with God?
Because Jacob begged God to bless him before he lets him go. Jacob was left alone when he wrestled with God. We need to spend time alone with God so that we could build our personal relationship. God wrestled with Jacob which means he fought with Jacob for this blessing. God wants us to try, to seek the blessing and put some effort, even struggle, and not just hope to get the blessing without doing anything. This wrestling is out of Jacob rather than by his strength and wisdom. We try hard to hold on to our beliefs and feelings and that could be negative if it leads us away from God. We have to seek the truth and wrestle for the truth by reading the Bible on our own and checking if our beliefs ling up with what God’s word says. God wounds Jacob which shows his power and that he is right, we think that we are know the truth and can get a little too confident because we think we have it all figured out. But God will reach in and break you, humble you so that you could realize that he is number one and you should listen to him. We must know we serve a God who is greater than us, and we cannot conquer much of anything until He conquers us. Before, Jacob stole a blessing from his father, but now he begs for a legitimate blessing from God. God blessed Jacob, as he did with Abraham and changes his name to Israel. We don’t have to approach God with a parade of good deeds because Jesus has gone before us and took the punishment we deserve.
Genesis chapter 33
God answers Jacobs prayer by changing Esau’s heart. Jacob and Esau reunite just like good brothers and there is no more revenge or hard feelings. This chapter talks about forgiveness which is interesting because the chapter number is 33 while Jesus died when he was 33 and showed the biggest act of forgivness. However, Jacob shows favoritism by putting some of his children and servants at the front of the line, while putting his favorite children at the back so that they wouldn’t get killed first. This is the same issue that Rebecca and Isaac had by playing favorites with their children. All playing favorites does create conflict in the family and we will see in the later chapters what happens in Jacob’s family because he played favorites.
Genesis chapter 34
Jacob’s sons decide to take vengeance on the people who violated Dina. But their vengeance was much worse as they killed a lot of people that were innocent from that town, causing trouble for Jacob and his family. Vengeance is never the solution because it always makes things worse. Jesus taught that we should forgive others and turn the other cheek, not kill others for the evil they have done to us. We leave vengeance to God as his judgment is coming.
Genesis chapter 35
Jacob’s name is Israel, he goes on a journey back to where God appeared to him. His 12’th son is born but it causes of Raechel to die. There was no evidence that Raechel loved God because previously she stole idols from her father and that lead to idols spreading across Jacobs family. In this chapter Jacob tells his family to get rid of their idols and go with him. Surprisingly they agree to do just that. It is important to warn your family and others if they are starting to worship idols instead of Jesus and spend too much time on something. Who you marry matters, if you want to love Jesus, date people who love Jesus. Jacob goes back to his father. His father Isaac dies due to old age. 
Genesis chapter 36
This chapter reveals Esau’s descendants and the tribes that formed. There is quite a lot of information about the family’s blood line which is there for a reason. This chapter historicaly shows when it takes place and confirms that this story is real because coming up with all these names and the bloodline would make no sense. We see that the blessing Isaac gave to Esau is fulfilled in this chapter (Genesis chapter 27, 39-40). If you think about it, Esau ended up with a bigger blessing than Jacob because he became the ruler of a kingdom. Later on Jacob’s descendants will become slaves of Egypt, however in the end Jacob’s descendant get the biggest blessing because through them Jesus is born while later on Esau’s kingdom will be destroyed. Sometimes the blessing we think is small will become big and sometimes the other way around, but always thank God for everything he does because his choice is always right, it is impossible for God to lie.
Genesis chapter 37
Jacob loved Joseph more than his other children which caused other children in the family to hate Joseph. This resulted in Josephs brothers wanting to kill Joseph. They start bullying him but Reuben tried to save him. Then Joseph was sold to the Ishmaelites. This story in a way resembles Jesus because Jesus was also mocked, bullied by the Jews and yet, just like Jacob, did not complain once. An important lesson is to not follow the evil things a group is doing. Judas offered a different, less violent approach – he offered to sell Josehp. Of course this isn’t a good thing but it is better than just killing him. If a group you are apart is following wicked ways, you should leave that group because the only one you should follow is God.
Genesis chapter 38
This chapter reveals more the brokenness and sin that is happening in Judas family. Jacob even loses two of his sons because of the sin that was happening. It makes us think, how could these people have been the one’s that were chosen by God? Even when sin was controlling the people of God, God still kept his promise and through these broken people eventually Jesus was born who is the one that saved us from this brokenness. In verse 23, Judas is more concerned about what other people think more than what God thinks. He believes that other people will laugh at him if they go looking for the woman. When we start thinking more about what others will think rather than what God will think, that is when we’ve got a spiritual problem. And if we do care more about what people think, the solution is confessing your sins to God and asking for forgiveness and strength. Lord, let me care more about what you think, than what people think.
Genesis chapter 39
Joseph shows obedience and faith to God by refusing to sin. The woman tempts him to sin; however, Jacob disagrees and even flees from her. Unfortunately, the woman lies to her husband about what happened, and Joseph get thrown in jail. Bad things still happen even though you did everything right and listened to God. This is because life is unfair, it is full of evil, and we don’t know how everything works; this topic is discussed in the book of Job. But even when life is unfair, God is always fair. He blesses Joseph in prison with luck. Just because something bad happens doesn’t mean that God is not with you. There is an even greater reward waiting for us if we keep God’s word and flee from sin. God will always find a way to bless those who are serving him. Later Joseph will become the second most powerful man in Egypt. Sometimes when you are suffering, God is getting to do something good in your life, but you just don’t know it yet. Keep trusting the Lord because it’s not over yet.
Genesis chapter 40
Joseph is asked to interpret dreams that other prisoners had. His interpretation came true because God told him what they mean. Joseph wanted the cup bearer to remember him when things go well for him, however he did not remember him and completely forgot about Joseph’s existence. This is an example of how many people act with God. They ask him for things that would benefit them and when they receive the things and everything goes well for them, the completely forget about God. Remember that God will never forget you and he is always there waiting for you to talk to him, he always cares about you and tries to protect you from evil so that things go well for you. We must have a both sided relationship with him. If he is always there for you, then you should be there for with him.
Genesis chapter 41
Pharaoh has two dreams that symbolize that Egypt will have 7 years of good harvest and then 7 years of famine and the people will be starving. These dreams were interpreted by Joseph by the power of God. Joseph gave all the glory to God for the interpretation and warned pharaoh about what is coming. Because of this, pharaoh make Joseph the second most powerful man in Egypt and let him rule and prepare for what is about to happen. God rewarded Joseph because he was obedient and gave glory to him the entire time. Other people notice you when you point to God more than yourself, which is a good thing, but people also notice when you don’t walk with God and turn away from him. Make sure that your life and your words match – if you are living for God, then your actions should show that.
Genesi chapter 42
Joseph meets his brothers after almost twenty years. This Joseph foreshadows the faithfulness of Joseph from the New Testament, the husband of Mary. The Old Testament Joseph takes care of the bread so that it would be distributed all over the world just like Joseph, form the New Testament, took care of the bread from heaven - Jesus. Joseph decides to put his brothers to the test to see if they have changed. He keeps Simeon as a prisoner and sends the other brothers back home with food and even the money they had paid for the food, to see if they would come back with Benjamin and were telling the truth. Joseph was good to his brothers and forgave them, but he was testing them to see if they were cautious because there are still consequences to what his brothers have done. Forgiveness doesn’t mean that the consequences of the wrong just go away, trust has to be earned. The brother’s regret not listening to Joseph before and not saving him. This shows how powerful anger and jealousy, hate can be and the evil it can cause us to do and lead us away from the Lord. We can’t hold on to hate because it ends up damaging others. We must realize that we have a problem, let go of it and pray to God to remove it, repent of our evil.
Genesis chapter 43
Jacob’s sons get ready to return to Joseph to get more food. Judas steps up and tells his father that they must bring Benjamin otherwise they will not come back home. Judas is prepared to take full responsibility for his brother and face the consequences (Genesis 43, 9-10). Someone has to step up in a family when times are hard. Don’t be silent if you have a plan in difficult situation because your plan might benefit the family. Jacob allows Benjamin to go and tells his sons to return the money they had found in their bags when they left and to bring gifts to Joseph (They still didn’t know it was Joseph but thought it was the second most powerful man in Egypt). When they returned, Jacob prepared a feast for them and was happy to see his brother Benjamin alive and well. He truly cares and loves his family.
Genesis chapter 44
Judah offers to be a slave to Joseph instead of Benjamin so that he could keep his promise to his father. This shows the change of Judah, earlier in Genesis 38 he was stuck in sin and was not acting like man of God. But now he changes, he loves his family and cares for his brothers and his father. Judah had matured because even though Jacob cared about Benjamin more than the others, just like he did with Joseph, Judah loves Benjamin despite of his father’s favoritism. This example shows us that we don’t have to stay in our sin forever, we can change, repent, go to confession and be free from sin by the power of the Holy Spirit. We need to be reminded that God truly wants us to change for the better and let go of our past sins and walk with him. We should learn to love others anyway, despite their frauds and weaknesses.
Genesis chapter 45
Why do bad things happen?
Joseph reveals who he actually is to his brothers. Joseph shows forgiveness to his brothers and even rewards them with blessings. This chapter shows how God can change your life – God’s plan for us is always incredible. If Joseph wouldn’t have been sold as a slave, then he wouldn’t have become the second most powerful man in Egypt and couldn’t have provided for his family like he can now. Just because something bad is happening in your life doesn’t mean that God is punishing you or that the future is going to be bad. Our thoughts are not Gods thoughts, and his plans are not our plans (Isiah 55, 8-9). We don’t understand how this world works, and we never will but whatever happens in life is for a reason that we just don’t know yet. Sometimes suffering is part of God’s plan to get us where he needs to take us. Trust that God is on our side always. Trusting the Lord will all our heart is what we need to do every day of our lives. We mustn’t let go of our obedience to him in difficult times.
Genesis chapter 46
On his way to Egypt, Jacob stops to worship God in Beer Shiba – the place where Abraham planted a tamarisk tree, and Isaac built an altar and received a special promise from God. This was the place the family knew they could go for special moments. Is there a secret, special place in your life for worshiping God? Jacob reunites with his son Joseph and fells like his life is complete – he could die happy (Genesis 46, 30). In the end of the chapter, we find out that Egyptians did not like shepherds and thought that they were dirty, didn’t want anything to do with them. Joseph thought of a good plan to separate Israel’s culture from Egyptians and not lose it while in Egypt. Jacob takes this journey in faith and trusts in the word that his son has spoken, saying that he has prepared a place for him. This is the same way Jesus tells us he is going to his Father’s house to prepare a place for us. Jacob’s journey is just like our journey. We trust the voice of the Son, who promises to be with us in this journey to protect us and provide for us.
Genesis chapter 47
Jacob blesses pharaoh which is something unusual because pharaoh was considered by the Egyptians a God. Jacob shows kindness to the nation, completely opposite than before when Jacob used to take things away, like he took the blessing from his brother Esau. Now Jacob is generous in his heart. The world continues to suffer from famine which causes those who don’t have money or food to be enslaved. But eventually this will change, the land will go from being enslaved to freedom but that will take time. With God also comes suffering. When we walk with God we think that everything will go well but all of a sudden challenges and hard times arise that test our faith. This causes some people to abandon God but remember that the suffering we are experiencing right now doesn’t even compare to the glory and future that is prepared for us in heaven (Romans 8, 18).
Genesis chapter 48
At this point in the story Jacob is very old and is about to die but before that he blesses Josephs sons. The younger son gets a bigger blessing than the older son which is unusual, but this has already happened before in Genesis, when Isaac blessed Jacob more than Esau. Jacob reminds Joseph that God will be with him and will return them to the promise land (Genesis 48, 21). This keeps reminding us that God always keeps his promise, no matter how much time has passed, his truth will always be there, his promise will eventually happen.
Genesis chapter 49
Jacob blesses his sons which will later become the twelve tribes of Israel. However, not all blessings were positive, for example Rubens’ blessing. His blessing was worse because of the sin he committed in the past (Genesis 35, 22). Our sin has consequences that can linger for a while. Often people’s blessing are going to be different. Some will get big blessings, while others – smaller. That does not mean that God loves them less, life is different for all of us. You are a part of God’s work just life each tribe of Israel but your role may not be the same as everybody elses. Don’t let smaller blessings or things that you didn’t expect sway you away from God, because his plan is always the best option no matter what.
Genesis chapter 50
After Jacob had died and was properly buried (Joseph fulfilled his promise to bury him in Canaan next to where Abraham, Isaac were buried), Josephs brothers though that since his father is gone, he might try getting revenge on his brothers for the evil they did in the past. They ask for forgiveness, just like their father asked them to and this made Jacob cry. Jacob is a man of good and just like God he forgives others for all the evil they had done – what was intended for evil, God make it good. God offers forgiveness to all of us, no matter how low we get, he washes our sins away and make the white as snow. We must also forgive others every time because if we are not able to forgive, then the Father won’t be able to forgive us.